fast map-based example (#35)
kr-colab/spatial_sims_standard: minimal_high_density.md

# `minimal_high_density.slim`: a minimal model suitable for high-density simulations

**code:** [minimal_high_density.slim](minimal_high_density.slim); on [github](https://github.com/kr-colab/spatial_sims_standard/blob/main/minimal_high_density.slim)

> This code implements the same model as [`minimal.slim`](minimal.html),

Reviewer: what is "minimal.html" here?  I don't see that file in the repo...

> This code implements the same model as [`minimal.slim`](minimal.html),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code implements the same model as [`minimal.slim`](https://github.com/kr-colab/spatial_sims_standard/blob/main/minimal.slim),
```

but implements some "map-based" alternative computational methods so that runtime is linear in density
instead of quadratic.
However, these methods are somewhat approximate and may lead to discretization artifacts if density is low,
so if neighborhood sizes are small (below, say 5 or 10), then the methods should probably not be used.

There are two aspects of the "standard" methods demonstrated in `minimal.slim` that are quadratic in population density
(i.e., quadratic in the parameter `K`): local density computation, and mate choice.
The two methods can be used independently - for instance, maybe your simulation
has small interaction neighborhood size but large mating neighborhood size,

> so you'd use these methods for mating but not density computations.

Reviewer: A little vague what "these methods" refers to.  Maybe it would be helpful to actually give the method shown in this example a name, so you can refer to it?  Otherwise, "the alternative method shown here" instead of "these methods", I guess.

Reviewer 2: Or just plop down the method/function names here to clarify the important differences? `smooth` and `sampleNearbyPoint`, maybe others?

Something like "The main changes from the `minimal.slim` example are use of the `SpatialMap` methods `smooth` and `sampleNearbyPoint`, which are described in more detail below."

> Both methods are linear because they rely on a pre-computed map of local density.

Reviewer: And now "both methods" is also vague/confusing here.  I thought at first that it referred to both the "standard" method and the "alternative" method, but that didn't make sense, so I guess the "alternative" method is actually two methods?  Anyhow, the usage of this vague term "method" needs to be cleaned up.

The basic computation to do this is
```
raw = summarizeIndividuals(p1.individuals, GRID_DIMS, p1.spatialBounds, operation="individuals.size();", perUnitArea=T);
```
This makes a grid of dimensions `GRID_DIMS`, counts up the number of individuals in each grid square,
and divides by the area of the square to get a density per unit area.
What is an appropriate size for these grid squares?
Well, we'd like these to be as big as is reasonable,
because computation will scale with the number of these squares.
But, this grid is the source of any discretization artifacts:

> the smaller the grid squares are, the closer this model is to `minimal.slim`.

Reviewer: or even worse, potentially!  could be *much* worse if you make them really small!

In both measuring local density and choosing mates we average over a kernel
with a certain characteristic scale: `SX` for local density (for "interactions") and `SM` for mating.
So, as long as our grid squares are sufficiently smaller than these,
any discretization will be smoothed out by those operations.

> So, we set the size of the grid cells to be approximately `min(SX,SM)/2`:

Reviewer: perhaps i will be obvious to most readers but of course if you're only using the method for one or the other purpose, you could customize the grid to either SX or SM; and you could conceivably make two different grids, too, if SX and SM are very different, right?

```
grid_dims = asInteger(2 * (p1.spatialBounds[c(2,3)] - p1.spatialBounds[c(0,1)]) / min(SX, SM));
```

The `raw` values are put in two maps: `RAW_DENSITY` and `DENSITY`;
the first is used for mate choice and the second for interactions.

## Local smoothed density

> Local density used as an input for mortality is computed in `minimal.slim`

Reviewer: due to interactions

by averaging over a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation `SX`.
To approximate this, we simply smooth the "raw" gridded density by that same kernel:
```
DENSITY.smooth(SX * 3, "n", SX);
```
and then look up the local, smoothed density at the location of every individual:
```
competition = p1.spatialMapValue(DENSITY, inds.spatialPosition);
```
This could be made more precise by taking into account that in computing the "raw" density
also involves some smoothing (the size of the grid squares).

> 

Reviewer: The word "in" seems stray here.  More importantly, I'm not sure what you're suggesting here.  How would you take that fact into account?  What would that look like in script?

multiplied by the same Gaussian kernel,
and then return the nearest individual to that location:
```
mate_location = RAW_DENSITY.sampleNearbyPoint(individual.spatialPosition, 3 * SM, "n", SM);
mate = i2.nearestNeighborsOfPoint(mate_location, p1, 1);
```

## Possible pitfalls

The two lines in the "mate choice" snippet can each cause their own problems if care is not taken.

First, the call to `sampleNearbyPoint` works by rejection sampling:
it picks a location nearby from the provided kernel,
and then retains the point with probability proportional to the value of the `RAW_DENSITY` map at that point.
The way this is implemented means that if values of density in some parts of the map are much higher than in other parts of the map,
this may do a large number of rejections.
Concretely, if the density within a circle of radius `3 * SM` around a given individual
is at most, say $10^{-6}$ times the maximum density over the entire map,
then choosing a mate for that individual will require sampling millions of locations.
The solution to this might be biological: first, identify individuals with sufficent possible mates

> to be able to mate successfully; and then only choose mates for those.

Reviewer: Well, OK, but how would you "identify individuals with sufficient possible mates to be able to mate successfully" if not doing a spatial search of the type we're trying to avoid?  Also, note that "sufficient" is misspelled.

Reviewer: Seems like really the guidance ought to be: if density in your simulation varies that dramatically, maybe this approach is not for you.  :->  Also: we could fix this problem, couldn't we?  Assess the max value within the specific grid squares being sampled from and use that max for the rejection sampling?  If that makes sense, maybe you can open an issue on it with whatever discussion you see as needed for me to implement it?

Second, the call to `i2.nearestNeighborsOfPoint` will fail, clearly, if there *are* no neighbors.
Since this call uses the interaction `i2`,
which was set up at the start of the simulation 
```
initializeInteractionType(2, "xy", reciprocal=T, maxDistance=5/sqrt(K));
```

> to have maximum interaction distance `5/sqrt(K)`.

Reviewer: This last sentence, "Since...", is a sentence fragment.

Reviewer: Also, it needs explanation why the max distance is "5/sqrt(K)" – where does that come from?

If the density is roughly $K$, this means there should be around 25 individuals in each circle of that radius;
however, if density is sufficiently nonuniform, or if you are simulating some nonequilibrium situation,
then this may fail.

> The code is robust to this:

Reviewer: How about "The code in this example handles this issue, by doing:".  I misread "The code is robust to this:" as saying "The code in the model is robust to the following two lines of code:" which had me scratching my head for a good thirty seconds!  As usual, "this" creates ambiguity and confusion.  :->

```
if (mate.size())
    subpop.addCrossed(individual, mate, count=rpois(1, FECUN));
```
means that if an individual has no neighbors, they will not reproduce,
but this is over a much smaller distance than our nominal mating distance, `SM`,

> so we don't want this to happen very much.

Reviewer: This needs a bit of rewriting.  "means that..." seems like it starts a sentence in the middle, and "this is over" and "we don't want this" both use "this" in an ambiguous way that I am honestly unable to puzzle out.

(Indeed, if `SM` was not much larger than `5/sqrt(K)` then we wouldn't be saving any computation at all.)

> 

Reviewer: Ends rather abruptly; some kind of closing sentence, a conclusion, a take-home point?
